TN0044-graphql-and-rest-together (#606)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0044-graphql-and-rest-together.mdx

- Offer rapid self-service
- Create an insulating contract
- magnify existing investments
- Govern the middle layer

<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/graphql-goals.png"
  alt="Image of 4 icon with text under each one for each of the 4 goals of an API strategy"
  width="100%"
/>

## Traditional N-Tier Architecture
In traditional n-tier architecture, the stack is broken into the Presentation, Application, and Data layers. Each of these have a distinct purpose:

- Presentation: where our customers touch our products, our experiences, and our API marketplaces
- Application: where our services and business logic live and through which our Presentation clients access their Data
- Data: The storage of data about your company, customers, products, etc.

<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/ntier-architecture.png"
  alt="Diagram of a typical n-tier architecture with Presentation, Application, and Data layers"
  width="100%"
/>

However, there is a gap between the Presentation and Application tiers that can cause friction between teams and prevent us from getting our data and products into the hands of our customer.

> From the Application Tier side's perspective:
> 
> > "Our job is to expose everything we know, all the data we have access to, and all the capabilities we must deliver in the most efficient, most performant, least opinionated way we can. How clients consume, aggregate, orchestrate and enrich what we provide via our API endpoints isn't really not our job. Remember, separation of concerns!"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the Application Tier perspective:

> "Our job is to expose everything we know, all the data we have access to, and all the capabilities we must deliver in the most efficient, most performant, least opinionated way we can. How clients consume, aggregate, orchestrate, and enrich what we provide via our API endpoints isn't really our job. Remember, separation of concerns!"
```

And from the Presentation side of the divide, the thinking is different:

> "We are frustrated that the APIs we access either don't provide what we need, require too much aggregation, or orchestration, are too slow, there's just too many of them and they are always changing without notice!"

Change is constant on both the Presentation and the Application tiers. There are always new clients, new data access requirements, product requirements, new data, new services, new business logic etc.

<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/change.png"
  alt="Diagram demonstrating the constant change on both Presentation and Application layers with a label that reads 'Mind the Gap'"
  width="100%"
/>

> ## Approaches to N-Tier Architecture

Reviewer: It's really not about an N-Tier architecture approach, but a complexity tradeoff approach. Where is the best place to manage the complexity... the client, a sprawl of services, or a dedicated integration layer.

```suggestion
## Approaches to Growing Complexity
```

### Client Managed
<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/client-managed.png"
  alt="Diagram showing a significant number of connections between the presentation layer and application layer"
  width="100%"
/>

**Analysis**

> Many API strategies start this way but very quickly get out of control. Every client is own their own and this very quickly leads to inconsistencies and maintainability issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many API strategies start this way but very quickly get out of control. Every client is on their own and this quickly leads to inconsistencies and maintainability issues.
```

**Problems**:

- Separation of concerns
- ❌ "Fat" clients and inconsistent UX
- ❌ Logic is thrown away on every client rewrite
- ❌ Not Rapid Self-Service

> - ❌ Not an Insulating Contract

Reviewer: You should define rapid self-service and insulating contracts in this post if you choose to use them as guiding criteria.

- ❌ Does not Magnify Existing Investments
- ❌ No Governance

### Backend For Frontend APIs (BFFs)
<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/BFFs.png"
  alt="Diagram showing a BFF for each application in the presentation layer talking to many backend services"
  width="100%"
/>

**Analysis**
BFFs are a reasonable approach to this problem as it allows data to be aggregated from the many backing APIs. However, as more and more clients are added, especially if your companies utilizes micro frontends, this can quickly grow out of control and become a problem of maintainability as well as make governance impossible.

**Problems**:
- ❌ Number of BFFs can expand to a point of it becoming impossible to manage
- ❌ Does not Magnify Existing Investments

> - ❌ No Governance

Reviewer: Technically an API Gateway would allow some governance of BFFs, but doesn't allow much governance of the data retrieval. You may want to layer that in!

<Note>It is possible that you may still have a need for a BFF in addition to GraphQL for "Utility" endpoints that are specific to your application. In this case, you could utilize a passthrough pattern to direct data fetch/mutation through your BFF to your GraphQL layer.</Note>

## Using GraphQL
<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/graphql.png"
  alt="Diagram showing a GraphQL layer bettween the Presentation and Application layers"
  width="100%"
/>

> GraphQL is a translation layer that allows the needs of the Presentation layer to be translated to the Application layer with it's services and data. By it's very nature it is self-serve, it provide insulating contracts, all investments are magnified since all consumers benefit from all investment, and it is highly governable since all data is exposed through a single endpoint with declarative policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GraphQL is a translation layer that allows the needs of the Presentation layer to be translated to the Application layer with its services and data. By its very nature, it is self-serve, it provides insulating contracts, all investments are magnified since all consumers benefit from all investments, and it is highly governable since all data is exposed through a single endpoint with declarative policies.
```

> * ✅ GraphQL enables rapid self service for our presentation clients by replacing one-off handwritten BFF apis with declarative queries.

Reviewer: I know a lot of this section is pulled straight from the talk track of the deck but you might consider writing it to provide a little more context as to how people view GraphQL today (an API) and how we view GraphQL to draw the comparison between an old mindset and bring people along to a new one.

Author: I decided these bullets made more sense with the headings they are associated to below... so I moved them down to replace the images under those headers.

I feel like it makes more sense this way but open to feedback about anything we want to expand on in those sections.

  width="100%"
/>

The abstraction that GraphQL provides allows new data entities and fields to be added over time without directly impacting the consuming clients. Our API clients can navigate across API bounds with no awareness that they are retrieving data from different teams, different APIs that could be written in different languages, with different API protocols, etc.

This magnifies your investments because investments in the graph are both immediate value to all current clients and value to all potential future clients. All investments in your graph pay dividends.

### Governance
<img
  src="./images/graphql-and-rest/graphql-goverance.png"
  alt="Diagram showing a set of graphql APIs as a single endpoint to govern"
  width="100%"
/>

Bringing all these core domain entities into one layer where they can satisfy an unlimited number of tailored queries from our clients, without creating a custom endpoint for each, means something important for governance.

It means we have a single place, a static place in our registry where all our API surface area is defined. Rather than hundreds of endpoints and custom code.

## Conclusion

> GraphQL should not be positioned as in competition with REST but rather as a new layer in the stack with a different purpose: Bridge "The Middle", the gap between Presentation and Application layers.

Reviewer: Grammar tweaks -- but I'd also add a "why" towards the end. What are they hiring GraphQL to do?

```suggestion
GraphQL is not in competition with REST, but rather is best used as a new layer in the stack with a different purpose: Bridge "The Middle", the gap between the Presentation and Application layers.
```

---

> title: Using Graphql and REST Together

Reviewer 2: @apollographql/docs would need to confirm, but I believe titles/headings are sentence-cased mostly, meaning this should be:

```suggestion
title: Using GraphQL and REST together
```

id: TN0044
tags: [architecture-patterns]
---

<Tip>

If you're looking for more material on this topic, watch Dan Boerner's keynote at API Summit 2023: [GraphQL and REST: True BFFs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5DVi99KPALo).
</Tip>

It is common to hear GraphQL and REST pitted against each other as competing technologies. While both technologies have some overlap, most organizations who have adopted GraphQL utilize each for different purposes and at various layers of the stack.

This page outlines some of the approaches typically taken, where GraphQL fits into the architectural toolbox best, and how it can help drive a resilient API strategy.

## Traditional N-Tier Architecture

> In a traditional n-tier architecture, the stack is broken into at least 3 layers: Presentation, Application, and Data layers. Each of these has a distinct purpose:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a traditional N-tier architecture, the stack is broken into at least 3 layers: Presentation, Application, and Data layers. Each of these has a distinct purpose:
```

    app3["⌚️ App"]
  end

  subgraph application["Application"]
    direction LR
    service1[Service]
    service2[Service]
    service3[Service]
  end

  subgraph data["Data"]
    direction LR
    database1[(Database)]
    database2[(Database)]
    database3[(Database)]
  end

  presentation --> application --> data
```

However, there is a gap between the Presentation and Application tiers that can cause friction between teams and prevent us from getting our data and products into the hands of our customers.

From the Application Tier perspective:

> "Our job is to expose everything we know, all the data we have access to, and all the capabilities we must deliver in the most efficient, most performant, least opinionated way we can. How clients consume, aggregate, orchestrate and enrich what we provide via our API endpoints isn't really our job. Remember, separation of concerns!"

And from the Presentation side of the divide, the thinking is different:

> "We are frustrated that the APIs we access either don't provide what we need, require too much aggregation, or orchestration, are too slow, there's just too many of them and they are always changing without notice!"

> Change is constant on both the Presentation and the Application tiers. There are always new clients, new data access requirements, product requirements, new data, new services, new business logic etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Change is constant on both the Presentation and the Application tiers. There are always new clients, new data access requirements, product requirements, new data, new services, new business logic, and many other kinds of changes.```

  app1["🖥️ App"]
  app2["📱 App"]
  app3["⌚️ App"]
  app4["✨ New App ✨"]

  service1[Service]
  service2[Service]
  service3[Service]
  service4["✨ New Service ✨"]
  service5["✨ New Service ✨"]

  database1[(Database)]
  database2[(Database)]
  database3[(Database)]
  database4[("✨ New Database ✨")]
  database5[("✨ New Database ✨")]

  app1 --> service1
  app2 --> service1
  app3 --> service1
  app4 -.-> service1

  app1 --> service2
  app2 --> service2
  app3 --> service2
  app4 -.-> service2

  app1 --> service3
  app2 --> service3
  app3 --> service3
  app4 -.-> service3

  app1 -.-> service4
  app2 -.-> service4
  app3 -.-> service4
  app4 -.-> service4

  app1 -.-> service5
  app2 -.-> service5
  app3 -.-> service5
  app4 -.-> service5

  service1 --> database1
  service2 --> database2
  service3 --> database3
  service4 -.-> database4
  service5 -.-> database5
```

## API Strategy Goals
As part of deciding an API strategy, there should be some high level goals set.

### Offer rapid self-service
The biggest goal of any API strategy should be to enable consumers. In practice, this means having as low of friction as possible for consumers to 

> get started consuming your API. The more a consumer can self-serve, the better.

Reviewer 2: Weird newlines happening again (from the last PR comments).

### Create an insulating contract
The consumers of an API should be shielded from the complexities of the backing services and vise versa. Every effort should be made to reduce
the impact of changes to downstream services on upstream clients.

### Magnify existing investments

> Any effort investment into an API should pay dividends. An investment should have a positive impact to multiple use cases now as well as many use cases in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Any effort investment into an API should have a positive impact to multiple use cases now as well as many use cases in the future.
```

### Govern the middle layer

> An API should have a defined stewardship and governance model. Appropriate stakeholders should be represented as part of the governance model.

Reviewer 2: Possibly link to existing technote?

Author: Which one?

Reviewer 2: https://www.apollographql.com/docs/technotes/TN0025-supergraph-stewardship/

## Approaches to Growing Complexity
### Client Managed
```mermaid
flowchart LR
%%{init:{'flowchart':{'nodeSpacing': 10, 'rankSpacing': 100}}}%%
  app1["🖥️ App"]
  app2["📱 App"]
  app3["⌚️ App"]

  service1[Service]
  service2[Service]
  service3[Service]
  service4[Service]
  service5[Service]

  database1[(Database)]
  database2[(Database)]
  database3[(Database)]
  database4[(Database)]
  database5[(Database)]

  app1 --> service1
  app2 --> service1
  app3 --> service1

  app1 --> service2
  app2 --> service2
  app3 --> service2

  app1 --> service3
  app2 --> service3
  app3 --> service3

  app1 --> service4
  app2 --> service4
  app3 --> service4

  app1 --> service5
  app2 --> service5
  app3 --> service5

  service1 --> database1
  service2 --> database2
  service3 --> database3
  service4 --> database4
  service5 --> database5
```

**Analysis**

Many API strategies start this way but very quickly get out of control. Every client is on their own and this quickly leads to inconsistencies and maintainability issues.

**Problems**:

- Separation of concerns
- ❌ "Fat" clients and inconsistent UX
- ❌ Logic is thrown away on every client rewrite

> - ❌ Not Rapid Self-Service

Reviewer 2: May want to rephrase; unsure what this is specifically trying to call out as an issue. Is it that they're not able to get started quickly by themselves? 

```suggestion
- ❌ Not rapid or self-service
```

If so

<Note>It is possible that you may still have a need for a BFF in addition to GraphQL for "Utility" endpoints that are specific to your application. In this case, you could utilize a passthrough pattern to direct data fetch/mutation through your BFF to your GraphQL layer.</Note>

## Using GraphQL
```mermaid
flowchart LR
%%{init:{'flowchart':{'nodeSpacing': 10, 'rankSpacing': 200}}}%%
  app1["🖥️ App"]
  app2["📱 App"]
  app3["⌚️ App"]
  graphql["✅ GraphQL ✅"]
  rest["Rest APIs"]
  grpc["gRPC APIs"]
  soap["SOAP APIs"]
  bus["Event Bus"]
  cms["CMS"]

  app1 --> graphql
  app2 --> graphql
  app3 --> graphql

  graphql --> rest
  graphql --> grpc
  graphql --> soap
  graphql --> bus
  graphql --> cms
```

GraphQL is a translation layer that allows the needs of the Presentation layer to be translated to the Application layer with its services and data. By its very nature, it is self-serve, it provides insulating contracts, all investments are magnified since all consumers benefit from all investments, and it is highly governable since all data is exposed through a single endpoint with declarative policies.

> ### Rapid Self Serve

Reviewer 2: These should be higher, or at a minimum, linked from the above list.

Author: Not sure I understand the suggestion.

These items are discussed under "API Strategy Goals" above and this section is talking specifically about how GraphQL accomplishes these goals.

---
title: Using GraphQL and REST together
id: TN0044
tags: [architecture-patterns]
---

<Tip>

If you're looking for more material on this topic, watch Dan Boerner's keynote at API Summit 2023: [GraphQL and REST: true BFFs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5DVi99KPALo).

> <ExpansionPanel title="Watch the video below">

Author: I actually originally had the video embedded and removed it based on feedback lol!

> <ExpansionPanel title="Watch the video below">

Reviewer: Great idea putting it in an expansion panel! I reasoned that it pushed the page down pretty far, and I think, in many cases, folks are expecting text and diagram-driven content in the tech notes, not embedded videos. I like this solution.

<Tip>

Read more on [Supergraph stewardship](/technotes/TN0025-supergraph-stewardship/)

</Tip>

## Approaches to growing complexity

### Client-managed

```mermaid
flowchart LR
%%{init:{'flowchart':{'nodeSpacing': 10, 'rankSpacing': 100}}}%%
  app1["🖥️ App"]
  app2["📱 App"]
  app3["⌚️ App"]

  service1[Service]
  service2[Service]
  service3[Service]
  service4[Service]
  service5[Service]

  database1[(Database)]
  database2[(Database)]
  database3[(Database)]
  database4[(Database)]
  database5[(Database)]

  app1 --> service1
  app2 --> service1
  app3 --> service1

  app1 --> service2
  app2 --> service2
  app3 --> service2

  app1 --> service3
  app2 --> service3
  app3 --> service3

  app1 --> service4
  app2 --> service4
  app3 --> service4

  app1 --> service5
  app2 --> service5
  app3 --> service5

  service1 --> database1
  service2 --> database2
  service3 --> database3
  service4 --> database4
  service5 --> database5
```

#### Analysis

Many API strategies start as client-managed, but this strategy can quickly get out of control. Every client is on their own, leading to inconsistencies and maintainability issues.

#### Problems

> - Separation of concerns

Reviewer 3: While I appreciated the visual nature of the ❌, they leave me a little confused.

Since "Separation of concerns" doesn't have ❌, does it mean it's a problem, or not a problem for this approach? Same questions for the ones that do have an ❌.

I would remove the ❌s, and if "Separation of concerns" is actually not a problem, I would add it to the "Analysis" section.

> - ❌ "Fat" clients and inconsistent UX

Reviewer 3: I'd like to avoid the use of "fat" here. Does this capture what you were trying to say:

```suggestion
- ❌ Dense client code and inconsistent UX
```

- ❌ Logic is thrown away on every client rewrite
- ❌ Not rapid or self-service
- ❌ Not an insulating contract
- ❌ Doesn't magnify existing investments
- ❌ No governance

### Backend for Frontend APIs (BFFs)

> 

Reviewer 3: Same a11y request.

  soap3[SOAP Service 3]
  soap4[SOAP Service 4]
  soap5[SOAP Service 5]
  grpc1[gRPC Service 1]
  grpc2[gRPC Service 2]
  grpc3[gRPC Service 3]
  grpc4[gRPC Service 4]
  grpc5[gRPC Service 5]
  app1 --> bff1
  app2 --> bff2
  app3 --> bff3
  app4 --> bff4
  app5 --> bff5
  bff1 --> rest1
  bff1 --> rest2
  bff1 --> rest3
  bff1 --> soap4
  bff1 --> grpc4
  bff2 --> rest3
  bff2 --> rest4
  bff2 --> rest5
  bff2 --> soap1
  bff2 --> soap2
  bff2 --> grpc1
  bff2 --> grpc2
  bff2 --> grpc3
  bff2 --> grpc4
  bff3 --> rest1
  bff3 --> rest3
  bff3 --> soap1
  bff3 --> soap2
  bff3 --> soap3
  bff3 --> soap5
  bff3 --> grpc5
  bff4 --> rest1
  bff4 --> grpc5
  bff5 --> grpc1
  bff5 --> grpc2
  bff5 --> grpc3
  bff5 --> grpc4
  bff5 --> grpc5
```

#### Analysis

BFFs can be a reasonable approach to the issues of the client-managed approach. The BFF approach lets data get aggregated from many backend APIs. However, as your organization adds more and more clients, this approach can also grow out of control. This can especially become an issue for organizations using micro-frontends. Maintainability and governance can become increasingly challenging.

#### Problems

> - ❌ Number of BFFs can expand to the point that it becomes impossible to manage them

Reviewer 3: Same, would remove ❌s

- ❌ Doesn't magnify existing investments
- ❌ While an API Gateway can provide some governance of BFFs, it still doesn't provide much governance of data retrieval

<Note>
  You may still need a BFF in addition to GraphQL for "Utility" endpoints
  specific to your application. In this case, you could use a passthrough
  pattern to direct data fetching and mutations through your BFF to your GraphQL

>   layer.

Reviewer 3: Can we add links/references for "Utility" endpoints and passthrough patterns?

Author: I'm not sure of what I could link to here.

Utility endpoints are going to be very specific to a business... they are just endpoints that aren't for typical data fetching.

And passthrough patterns are going to depend on each language... I could link to an example library for node, but this note is otherwise very language agnostic so I'd rather not.

</Note>

> ## Using GraphQL

Reviewer 3: Double-checking this was meant to be an H2, since it seems like one approach for growing complexity

> 

Reviewer 3: Same a11y request
